# UAF RNASeq Lecture
This repository contains scripts and a short walkthrough of an RNA-Seq analysis pipeline, to be used by Dr. Jessica Glass's Genomics and Bioinformatics class at the University of Alaska Fairbanks.

## Contents
1. [Getting set up](https://github.com/kmeaton/UAF_RNASeq_Lecture#getting-set-up)
2. [Cleaning and mapping reads](https://github.com/kmeaton/UAF_RNASeq_Lecture#cleaning-and-mapping-reads)
3. [Analyzing expression patterns](https://github.com/kmeaton/UAF_RNASeq_Lecture#testing-for-differential-gene-expression)

## Getting set up

1. Log in to your [Github](https://github.com) account.

2. Download the scripts and other content from this repository by clicking the green "Code" button towards the upper right-hand side of the repository. 

3. You'll primarily be working with the files ```HW_count_data.csv```, ```HW_col_data.csv```, and ```DESeq2.R```, but I've included some other files here as well. Open up ```DESeq2.R``` in Rstudio on your local machine, and follow along as I run through a brief tutorial.

## Cleaning and mapping reads

1. I've included a few shell scripts in this repository called ```sample_*.sh```, these all contain examples of how to run the read processing programs I discussed in my lecture. Feel free to peruse these sometime later, so you can really understand how to run the programs I was talking about!

## Testing for differential gene expression

1. First, follow along as I run through the analysis of an example dataset. Here, I'll be analyzing the files ```EXAMPLE_col_data.csv``` and ```EXAMPLE_count_data.csv```. These actually are a subset of the Tag-Seq data that I collected in Eaton et al. 2022 (Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution). Here, you'll be able to see first-hand how I ran through and analyzed these data. The file ```EXAMPLE_col_data.csv``` contains some information about the name of each sample, as well as the treatment group that sample was in (21C, our control group, or 27C, our extreme heat stress group). The file ```EXAMPLE_count_data.csv``` contains read count data for each of these samples, as generated by a read-counting program like Stringtie. 

2. Now, using the example code in ```DESeq2.R```, write your own code to analyze the data in ```HW_col_data.csv``` and ```HW_count_data.csv```. These data are a subset of the data collected in [Bernal et al., 2020, Science Advances](https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/sciadv.aay3423). Briefly, in this experiment, the authors did RNA-Seq on 5 different fish species inhabiting the Great Barrier Reef over the course of a major heatwave. They collected liver RNA samples at four different time-points: pre-heatwave (December), early-heatwave (February), mid-heatwave (March), and post-heatwave (July). Here, you will re-analyze the data collected by Bernal et al., for a single species (*Acanthochromis polyacanthus*) at just two time points: December and February. 
